lecture-01/intro-to-sweave.md, before:

# Introduction to Literate Programming

## Sweave for R

Sweave documents weave together documentation/discussion and code into a
single document. The pieces of code and documentation are referred to as
‘chunks’. R comes with a set of tools that allow you to extract just the
code, or to turn the entire document into a nicely formatted report.

Here’s a simple Sweave document to get you started:

    \documentclass{article}
    \begin{document}

    This is a very simple Sweave file. It includes only a single
    code chunk.

    <<>>=
    z <- rnorm(30, mean=0, sd=1)
    summary(z)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 observations 
    drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard 
    deviation one.

    \end{document}  

Type those lines into a text editor and save the document with the name
`sweave1.Rnw`.

Let’s break down the various pieces of the document. The first two lines and the last line represent LaTeX commands.

    \documentclass{article}
    \begin{document}
        ....
    \end{document}


For simple Sweave documents that's all the LaTeX you need to learn. However,
learning a little bit more about the  document preparation system gives
you the option of producing very nicely formatted output as we’ll see in
a little bit.

The R code is preceeded by the text `<<>>=`. This tells Sweave that
you’re starting a code chunk. The `@` symbol after the code chunk tells
Sweave that you’re going back to writing documentation chunks.

If you already have a working installation of LaTeX on your computer you can
now compile this into a nicely formatted document from the R
interpretter.  Change the R working directory so that it’s in the same
directory where you saved the `sweave1.Rnw` file. The execute the
following commands:

    > library(tools)  # makes the texi2dvi function available
    > Sweave('sweave1.Rnw') # compiles our Sweave document into 'sweave1.tex'
    > texi2dvi("sweave1.tex", pdf = TRUE)

These commands will produce two new documents – `sweave1.tex` and a PDF
document, `sweave1.pdf`. You can open the `sweave1.tex` file in any text
editor and you’ll see that it’s just a slightly modified version of the
`sweave1.Rnw` file you created. The PDF file contains the nicely
formatted report.

If you got an error message the most likely reason is that R can’t find
the path to your LaTeX executable. To check this try:

    > texi2dvi('sweave1.tex', pdf=TRUE, quiet=FALSE)

If that's the case, you can fix that by typing the following into the R
command line (on OS X):

    > Sys.setenv("PATH" = paste(Sys.getenv("PATH"),"/usr/texbin",sep=":"))  

Then try executing the `texi2dvi` command again. If that solved your
problem you can make this permanent by adding that line to your
.Rprofile (located in `/Users/yourname` on OS X; if the file doesn’t
already exist go ahead and create it). If that doesn’t work please see
me for troubleshooting help.

### RStudio makes Sweaving easy!

RStudio hides some of the complexity of Sweaving documents. Simply create or open your Sweave document (use the .Rnw extension) in RStudio and then hit the `Compile PDF` button. If your LaTeX setup is working, and the document and code are valid, Rstudio will compile everything behind the scenes and pop up a nice PDF.


### A fancier Sweave document

Let’s get a little bit fancier and show how we can create graphics and
use some LaTeX formatting features to produce a nicer document.

    \documentclass[letterpaper]{article}
    \usepackage[margin=0.75in]{geometry}

    \title{My Second Sweave Report}
    \author{John Q. Public}

    \begin{document}
    \maketitle
    This is a still a simple Sweave file. However, 
    now it includes several code chunks and several 
    \LaTeX\ specific commands.

    \section{Sampling from the random normal distribution}

    <<>>=
    z <- rnorm(30, mean=0, sd=1)
    summary(z)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 
    observations drawn from a normal distribution with mean 
    zero ($\mu = 0$) and standard deviation one ($\sigma = 1$).


    \section{Generating figures}

    We can also automatically imbed graphics in our 
    report. For example, the following will generate 
    a histogram.

    % this tells Sweave to set the graphics 
    % to be half the width of the text
    \setkeys{Gin}{width=0.5\textwidth} 
    <<fig=TRUE>>=
    hist(z)
    @

    \end{document}    


Notice how we put an argument, `fig=TRUE` within the second code chunk
delimiter. This will tell Sweave to automatically imbed a figure with
the histogram graphic we created into our report. Save this as
`sweave2.Rnw` and repeat the above steps to compile it into a PDF
report.

For a full overview of Sweave’s capabilities see the documentation for
Sweave availabe at <http://www.stat.uni-muenchen.de/~leisch/Sweave/>.

## Pweave for literate programming in Python

Pweave uses almost exactly the same syntax as Sweave to delimit code and
document chunks. Here's a simple Pweave document.

    \documentclass[letterpaper]{article}
    \usepackage[margin=0.75in]{geometry}
    \usepackage{graphicx} % unlike Sweave, Pweave doesn't
                          % pull this in automatically

    \title{My First Pweave Report}
    \author{John Q. Public}

    \begin{document}
    \maketitle
    This is a still a simple Pweave file. As in our Sweave example,
    there are several code chunks and we've included a figure.

    \section{Sampling from the random normal distribution}

    <<>>=
    from numpy import random
    z = random.normal(loc=0, scale=1, size=30)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 
    observations drawn from a normal distribution with mean 
    zero ($\mu = 0$) and standard deviation one ($\sigma = 1$).


    \section{Generating figures}

    We can also automatically imbed graphics in our 
    report. For example, the following will generate 
    a histogram.

    % this tells Sweave to set the graphics 
    % to be half the width of the text
    \setkeys{Gin}{width=0.5\textwidth} 
    <<fig=True>>=
    import pylab
    pylab.hist(z)
    @

    \end{document}


Note that the second code chunk, we wrote `fig=True` in the Pweave
document, whereas we wrote `fig=TRUE` for the Sweave document. This
minor difference reflects the different syntax for boolean values in R
and Python.

Save that code in a text file called `pweave1.Pnw` and from the bash
shell (*not* in the Python interpretter) type the following command:

    Pweave -f 'tex' pweave1.Pnw

The option `-f 'tex'` tells Pweave to output a  file. Assuming you got
no error messages, you can then compile this to PDF using the following
command:

    pdflatex pweave1.tex

Commit message:

added note about double quotes in windows
The windows command prompt is brain dead and doesn't recognize single
and double quotes equivalently so my Pweave example wasn't working.

lecture-01/intro-to-sweave.md, after:

# Introduction to Literate Programming

## Sweave for R

Sweave documents weave together documentation/discussion and code into a
single document. The pieces of code and documentation are referred to as
‘chunks’. R comes with a set of tools that allow you to extract just the
code, or to turn the entire document into a nicely formatted report.

Here’s a simple Sweave document to get you started:

    \documentclass{article}
    \begin{document}

    This is a very simple Sweave file. It includes only a single
    code chunk.

    <<>>=
    z <- rnorm(30, mean=0, sd=1)
    summary(z)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 observations 
    drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard 
    deviation one.

    \end{document}  

Type those lines into a text editor and save the document with the name
`sweave1.Rnw`.

Let’s break down the various pieces of the document. The first two lines and the last line represent LaTeX commands.

    \documentclass{article}
    \begin{document}
        ....
    \end{document}


For simple Sweave documents that's all the LaTeX you need to learn. However,
learning a little bit more about the  document preparation system gives
you the option of producing very nicely formatted output as we’ll see in
a little bit.

The R code is preceeded by the text `<<>>=`. This tells Sweave that
you’re starting a code chunk. The `@` symbol after the code chunk tells
Sweave that you’re going back to writing documentation chunks.

If you already have a working installation of LaTeX on your computer you can
now compile this into a nicely formatted document from the R
interpretter.  Change the R working directory so that it’s in the same
directory where you saved the `sweave1.Rnw` file. The execute the
following commands:

    > library(tools)  # makes the texi2dvi function available
    > Sweave('sweave1.Rnw') # compiles our Sweave document into 'sweave1.tex'
    > texi2dvi("sweave1.tex", pdf = TRUE)

These commands will produce two new documents – `sweave1.tex` and a PDF
document, `sweave1.pdf`. You can open the `sweave1.tex` file in any text
editor and you’ll see that it’s just a slightly modified version of the
`sweave1.Rnw` file you created. The PDF file contains the nicely
formatted report.

If you got an error message the most likely reason is that R can’t find
the path to your LaTeX executable. To check this try:

    > texi2dvi('sweave1.tex', pdf=TRUE, quiet=FALSE)

If that's the case, you can fix that by typing the following into the R
command line (on OS X):

    > Sys.setenv("PATH" = paste(Sys.getenv("PATH"),"/usr/texbin",sep=":"))  

Then try executing the `texi2dvi` command again. If that solved your
problem you can make this permanent by adding that line to your
.Rprofile (located in `/Users/yourname` on OS X; if the file doesn’t
already exist go ahead and create it). If that doesn’t work please see
me for troubleshooting help.

### RStudio makes Sweaving easy!

RStudio hides some of the complexity of Sweaving documents. Simply create or open your Sweave document (use the .Rnw extension) in RStudio and then hit the `Compile PDF` button. If your LaTeX setup is working, and the document and code are valid, Rstudio will compile everything behind the scenes and pop up a nice PDF.


### A fancier Sweave document

Let’s get a little bit fancier and show how we can create graphics and
use some LaTeX formatting features to produce a nicer document.

    \documentclass[letterpaper]{article}
    \usepackage[margin=0.75in]{geometry}

    \title{My Second Sweave Report}
    \author{John Q. Public}

    \begin{document}
    \maketitle
    This is a still a simple Sweave file. However, 
    now it includes several code chunks and several 
    \LaTeX\ specific commands.

    \section{Sampling from the random normal distribution}

    <<>>=
    z <- rnorm(30, mean=0, sd=1)
    summary(z)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 
    observations drawn from a normal distribution with mean 
    zero ($\mu = 0$) and standard deviation one ($\sigma = 1$).


    \section{Generating figures}

    We can also automatically imbed graphics in our 
    report. For example, the following will generate 
    a histogram.

    % this tells Sweave to set the graphics 
    % to be half the width of the text
    \setkeys{Gin}{width=0.5\textwidth} 
    <<fig=TRUE>>=
    hist(z)
    @

    \end{document}    


Notice how we put an argument, `fig=TRUE` within the second code chunk
delimiter. This will tell Sweave to automatically imbed a figure with
the histogram graphic we created into our report. Save this as
`sweave2.Rnw` and repeat the above steps to compile it into a PDF
report.

For a full overview of Sweave’s capabilities see the documentation for
Sweave availabe at <http://www.stat.uni-muenchen.de/~leisch/Sweave/>.

## Pweave for literate programming in Python

Pweave uses almost exactly the same syntax as Sweave to delimit code and
document chunks. Here's a simple Pweave document.

    \documentclass[letterpaper]{article}
    \usepackage[margin=0.75in]{geometry}
    \usepackage{graphicx} % unlike Sweave, Pweave doesn't
                          % pull this in automatically

    \title{My First Pweave Report}
    \author{John Q. Public}

    \begin{document}
    \maketitle
    This is a still a simple Pweave file. As in our Sweave example,
    there are several code chunks and we've included a figure.

    \section{Sampling from the random normal distribution}

    <<>>=
    from numpy import random
    z = random.normal(loc=0, scale=1, size=30)
    @

    That code chunk generated a random sample of 30 
    observations drawn from a normal distribution with mean 
    zero ($\mu = 0$) and standard deviation one ($\sigma = 1$).


    \section{Generating figures}

    We can also automatically imbed graphics in our 
    report. For example, the following will generate 
    a histogram.

    % this tells Sweave to set the graphics 
    % to be half the width of the text
    \setkeys{Gin}{width=0.5\textwidth} 
    <<fig=True>>=
    import pylab
    pylab.hist(z)
    @

    \end{document}


Note that the second code chunk, we wrote `fig=True` in the Pweave document, whereas we wrote `fig=TRUE` for the Sweave document. This minor difference reflects the different syntax for boolean values in R and Python.

Save that code in a text file called `pweave1.Pnw` and from the bash shell (*not* in the Python interpretter) type the following command:

    Pweave -f "tex" pweave1.Pnw

The option `-f "tex"` tells Pweave to output a file (Note: from the Windows command prompt you must use double quotes around "tex", on Unix-based systems either single our double quotes work fine). Assuming you got no error messages, you can then compile this to PDF using the following command:

    pdflatex pweave1.tex
